Once around the Andromeda galaxy.
Andromeda galaxy. One of my favorite
objects in the sky lies in the
constellation of Andromeda which is
really laid out as a couple of lines
that converge on the star Alpharats
which is also a corner star of the great
square of Pegasus. So it's kind of
shared between the two constellations.
um and that is Alpha Andromeda.
The most obvious other stars are the
delta star, beta star which is called
mirac and almac at the end there which
is gamma the third brightest and easy to
find those from the great square because
of that uh shared corner star. So if you
start from that corner star and head
along that line to delta and then
following the green line up to beta
mirac and turn right and go past a
couple of fainter stars MW and new then
you find the Andromeda galaxy as a fuzzy
patch in the sky that you can see with
the naked eye. Charles Messier put it in
his catalog of annoying things that were
not comets in his uh list. It was number
31. And this is a list of things that
people used to keep reporting to him as
a great comet hunter. He would get these
reports when people thought they had
found a comet. Um, and he had this
checklist of things that had been seen
before. So, uh, number 31 in the Messier
catalog. As I say, you can see it with
the naked eye, but what you're really
looking at is the bright nucleus of it.
The full extent is about five times the
area of the full moon. And we got the
full moon there shown just for scale
comparison. I very much doubt you'd
actually see these two in the sky like
this. Best viewed with low magnification
with binoculars or with the lowest
possible magnification you can squeeze
out of your telescope because it is such
a large object on the sky.
Now, we now know that it's 2 and a half
million light years away. And the
distance between the Milky Way galaxy
and Andromeda is about 20 times the size
of those galaxies. So, Andromeda is
slightly larger at 220,000
lighty years. And you'd you'd fit uh 10
and a bit of those in the gap between um
or 20 of the Milky Way in the gap
between depending on which way you were
going.
We know the distance because it was one
of the things that made Edwin Hubble
famous.
He located a variable star called a
sephiid variable in the Andromeda nebula
as it was then known and that's marked
at the top of the diagram which is in
the negative. So bright things are shown
as black in this picture. So we have the
nucleus of the galaxy in the middle,
some of the dust lanes around it, and
then bright stars marked as little dots
and up the top there between the two
black bars where it says var, that's the
variable that he found. The N has been
crossed out and a couple of other N's
there in this photograph of the 6th of
October 1923.
N stood for nova which marked a star
that had appeared um as a transient
wasn't there in previous photographs and
then went away again. But he's crossed
out the N for this one and written var
because it's a variable star. And these
bright variable stars called sephid
variables have a very useful property
which is that they pulsate.
And the period of their pulsation
relates to how powerful they are, how
much mass there is and how much light
they give out. And so if you know the
power of the star and you can compare
that with how bright it appears from
Earth, you can infer the distance.
And we can't know the power except for
the fact that there is this relationship
which means that if we just watch the
star pulsating the time between the
pulsations can just be read off to give
us the power output and then from there
we can work out the distance. And this
was first discovered by Henrietta Levit
Swan.
She identified a whole bunch of these
sephiid variables in the large melanic
cloud. Now the large melanic cloud is a
dwarf galaxy that orbits around the
milky way and is about 160,000 lighty
years away and only a few light years
across. So any star within it was to
within 1% at the same distance
from the earth. So all these sephids are
at the same distance and therefore their
apparent brightness is directly
correlated with their true power output.
And if you compare that against the
period, you get this nice straight line
which tells us that these are nature's
standard candles and we can use them to
infer distance. And that's exactly what
Hubble did and he got a figure of about
1 million light years. Now that's not
quite right. The modern figure is more
like 2 1/2 million lighty years. And the
reason for that was figured out in the
1940s. Wal Walter Bada
worked out that there were actually two
classes of sephiid variables both with
the same type of relationship um shown
in this graph here as the yellow and the
blue stars. And they are roughly equal
in slope but slightly shifted on the
diagram. And so if you don't take
account of the fact that you have to
work out whether this is a younger
population one more massive sephid or an
older fainter population two sephid then
it can be confusing and having done that
and then reassessed the distance using
Hubble's variable in M31 we get a value
of just over 2 million lighty years. Um
so twice the distance that he estimated
because he didn't know that there were
two classes of sephids to be accounted
for.
So Andromeda is just over 2 and a half
million lighty years away from the Milky
Way and these are the two largest
galaxies in what we call the local
group. The third largest is triangulum.
It's about 10% the size of the Milky
Way. And then we have the large and
small Magelinic clouds which are dwarf
galaxies in orbit around the Milky Way
alone along with a bunch of others. And
then Andromeda has a group of small
dwarf galaxies orbiting it as well. And
one or two wanderers that seem to be in
between like NGC 6822 there that's kind
of halfway between the two.
It's a slightly larger galaxy, little
bit bigger, 220,000 lighty years across
and a trillion stars compared to the 400
billion that we think are in the Milky
Way. Although that's not an exact figure
because we can't see all of it very
well. Lovely photograph here and it
shows the bright nucleus and the
material swirling around it, the dust
lanes and it shows a couple of the dwarf
galaxies as well which we'll come on to.
You can also begin to see a couple of
interesting things here. One is that the
disc of the galaxy looks a bit warped.
And the other is that there aren't
really any properly defined spiral arms.
These are more rings around the galaxy
than they are spirals. Another
photograph here taken by my good friend
Paul Biske,
an amateur astronomer of uh this area,
but his photographs are truly amazing.
And this one is constructed using three
different filters. Red is hydrogen gas,
green is oxygen, and the blue is the uh
emissions from sulfur. By using this
particular palette of colors, you pick
out the structure within Andromeda very
well. And again, you can see the slight
warping of the disc seems to be raised
on the left and lowered on the right.
And you can see the structure within the
dust lanes and the red star forming
regions. And the the true full
resolution of photograph that uh uh Paul
has done on this one is astonishing. You
can zoom right in and see all those star
forming regions in and around the uh
uh arms of the Andromeda galaxy as clear
as if they were in the Milky Way itself.
Now, there's a very curious thing. We've
got these star forming regions with
bright young blue stars in the center
pouring out ultraviolet and uh that's
ionizing the hydrogen gas and making it
glow red. But overall,
this is actually the case that the
Andromeda galaxy seems to have been
forming fewer stars recently than the
Milky Way by about a factor of six. Um,
so things have slowed right down for it
and we're not quite sure why that is.
When we look at its companions, we see
two of these dwarf elliptical galaxies
in orbit around the main galaxy. M32.
It's just a little bit further away,
110,000 lighty years beyond the main uh
structure and was the first elliptical
galaxy to be observed.
typical of elliptical galaxies. It's got
lots of old small stars, red ones and
yellow ones in it and practically no gas
and dust and not much star formation has
been going on recently and hence any
giant stars that would have been very
massive have already burnt out. Um they
wouldn't last very long at all. But
there have been some detections of hints
of a pulse of recent star formation. So
that's probably a few hundred million
years ago. Now
the other companion M110,
well that wasn't really a Messier object
in the original form of Charles
Messier's catalog. It was added later,
but nevertheless we call it M110.
There's also an NGC catalog number for
it, NGC 205.
But this is likely to have been a dwarf
spiral galaxy smaller than Andromeda,
smaller than the Milky Way, that has
come too close to its large neighbor and
had all its outer layers removed,
leaving just the central bulge and
nucleus of the galaxy to appear to be
this elliptical blob.
And we think that it was a significant
spiral galaxy with its own family of
around 30 dwarf galaxies orbiting around
it when it encountered the main
Andromeda galaxy. And that stole not
only all the gas and dust, but it also
stole those 30 dwarf galaxies and made
them its own. So those are now added to
the collection that are all in orbit
around Andromeda.
Very similar story with globular
clusters. The Andromeda galaxy has over
400 globular clusters each with their G
number marked on this little photograph
here. And
that's many more than the Milky Way,
which has something like 150, I think.
And again, some of these may have been
delivered um accompanying the merger or
the near merger with
uh M110.
Also, in the center of this photograph,
you can see a very bright cluster of hot
blue stars, fairly young stars
glowing away very brightly. NGC 206
there. And it's at the junction of the
two different dust lanes, which is very
interesting indeed.
Here's another globular cluster picture.
This is G1, the first one to be
discovered. And this contains an
intermediate mass black hole of about a
thousand solar masses. And again, we
think this is most likely the central
nucleus of a dwarf galaxy that has lost
its outer layers to its rather
cannibalistic neighbor. The giant
Andromeda galaxy has stripped all these
down to their cores. Their cores are
such that all of these stars are
gravitationally bound. They're all
within the overall hill sphere of the
total mass of the nucleus. So, they stay
together. But the more weakly bound
outer layers get removed by the presence
of the giant uh structure right next
door.
And when we look at Andromeda, we do see
a number of curious features. I've
already mentioned the circularity of the
dust lanes. They're not really spirals.
It's not really showing spiral arms at
all this galaxy. It's also got a warped
disc. It's got that large star cluster
NGC
206 far larger than any similar cluster
in the Milky Way. And then there are
some very strange things going on in the
nucleus.
But first, let's have a look at the two
dwarf galaxies that you can see, one
above and one below the main galaxy
there. So
Messier 32, we think a few hundred
million years ago, it plowed straight
through Andromeda and out the other side
and in the process lost all of its outer
gas and loosely bound stars, just
leaving that central
elliptical blob of a nucleus behind. And
in the process it probably created the
circularization
of the ring patterns around the main
galaxy. So this is quite common. Ring
galaxies quite often form when one
galaxy punches through another and
creates this circularization
almost a circular set of ripples.
So we think that's what M32 has
contributed to this.
M33, the triangulum galaxy, lovely
photograph here with all those marvelous
star forming regions within it and
slightly fluffy appearance has also
probably longer ago had a near miss with
the Andromeda galaxy. And that may well
have been what's warped the shape of the
main galaxy's disc.
Here again is the NGC 206, the bright
star cluster. Absolutely monstrous
number of stars within it. Nothing like
that in the Milky Way. You can see it in
the main photo at the join of those uh
dust lanes and then inset slightly
larger. If we zoom in even further, you
get a bit more detail of it here. And
again, this is possibly a tidal
interaction of the gravity of either M32
or M33 with the main galaxy that has
triggered off a massive burst of star
formation just in this one spot.
But there is another intriguing
possibility with Andromeda that way back
in the past it was actually formed from
two large spirals merging together. And
maybe this is partly responsible for
some of those features. But this would
have been many billions of years ago.
Can't account really for the young star
cluster NGC 206, but maybe for the
circularization and the warped discs. So
maybe these two galaxies combined to
form this one monster. Now we know that
our Milky Way has undergone a similar
process. We've even got a name that
we've given to the merging galaxy Gaia
Enceladus. And we see that Gaia
Enceladus brought its own population of
stars which are chemically slightly
different mixtures and different ages uh
to form the Milky Way. So the process of
galactic archaeology is gradually
uncovering the history of all of these
ancient mergers.
But if we drill down into the nucleus of
Andromeda, we can see with this X-ray
picture from New Star, a lot of X-ray
emitters, X-ray binaries where a pair of
giant stars have evolved. One of them
has gone through the phases and
collapsed down to a black hole or a
neutron star while the other has then
later expanded into a giant and loses
its outer layers stripped away by the
gravity of its neighbor and that then
spirals down and gets very very hot and
emits a lot of high energy radiation,
ultraviolet and X-rays. And you can see
in the inset at the top there, the
bright blue dot that seems to be coming
from the very center of M31.
And when we look into that center with
Hubble, we find that there is something
curious, a double nucleus. You can see
it in the inset picture there. You have
a bright region which is clearly a
binary structure. There are two areas to
it. And when we look in extreme detail
with Hubble in an image spanning just 40
light years, you can see the classical
nucleus, the bright bit, that's the
position where we see the nucleus when
we look at it with our telescopes. But
just off to the right, there is a bright
dot, brighter than the surroundings,
fainter than its uh main classical
nucleus. And that is where the center of
mass is. It's the true center of
Andromeda.
When we look in more detail again, we
can see in color here that there are
three structures P1, P2 and P3. And P1
and P2 are red in color indicating gas
and dust and stars mixed together. But
P3 is very small and very bright and
blue. And in fact, there's a lot of
ultraviolet and X-rays coming from
there. This is M31 star, the super
massive black hole of many millions of
solar masses right in the center. The
controlling gravitational mass in this
region surrounded by a cluster of Aclass
hot young stars and uh a lot of gas and
dust. But uh this is the super massive
black hole being placed in that
situation.
Now when we look again at the overall
galaxy,
another of Mr. Beskin's photographs, but
this one is a combination of hydrogen
alpha single narrow band and a red
filter continuum background of a wider
spectral characteristic. And what he's
done is subtracted one from the other so
that the hydrogen alpha line has been
picked out in extreme detail here. It's
a very very powerful technique and it's
showing those ring structures
as bright and it's also showing
something rather interesting that wasn't
discovered until the 1980s and that is
the nuclear spiral right in the center
of Andromeda. And I got an even better
photograph of it. Again, Paul Beskine,
and thanks Paul for letting me use these
images.
I was absolutely stunned when I first
saw this. It's in the negative, so the
bright bits are dark in this image, but
um you can see that there appears to be
material swirling and spiraling in
towards the center. perhaps the gravity
of that M31 star super massive black
hole at work here. And what we're not
sure about is is this a flat spiral, a
tilted spiral, or is it a spherical
structure uh of material all chaotically
trying to get into the center um as it's
uh spiraling to its doom. So more study
required on that one.
Going to the outer part of the galaxy,
it's massive. The halo extends 2 million
light years out from the center of
the Andromeda galaxy, which is almost
all the way over to the Milky Way, in
fact. And so there's a huge envelope of
mostly hydrogen gas. And again, this all
points back to these historic mergers
having blown huge amounts of material
out beyond the galaxy. So quite
incredible what we're beginning to learn
about Andromeda.
And we of course know that it's coming
our way. The Milky Way and Andromeda are
approaching each other at well over 100
kilometers per second. I have seen
figures as high as 163 kilometers/
second. I suspect that's 100 miles/s
really though.
And this is detectable through the
Doppler effect, the blue shift of the
light. So in about 4.5 billion years,
the Andromeda and Milky Way will merge.
Presumably, it'll be called Milk
Andromeda, if there's anyone still
around to do that, because that's about
the same time that the sun runs out of
fuel. So, it's a bad day for planet
Earth.
Talking of planets though, we've
discovered probably the first exoplanet
in another galaxy, an extra galactic
planet.
Not by direct observation. Indeed, this
was detected by microl lensing. So, a
small star perhaps with a planet around
it
passed in front of a distant star and
the result of that was it created
through the mass bending spacetime
according to Einstein's general theory
of relativity. It curved the spacetime
around itself and as it passed across
the line of sight, the image of the more
distant star was affected by that and
made suddenly brighter as if a lens was
focusing the images towards us. And so
the light curve raised to a maximum and
then faded away. But there is a small
blip and that small blip suggests a
planet about six times the mass of
Jupiter was in orbit around the
intervening star. Now the problem with
this technique really frustratingly is
these events only happen once. So what
you can't do is hope to observe it again
making another flyby another transit
event and see if we can confirm the
data. So a very difficult uh thing to
follow up on. But if this is confirmed
somehow then that would be the first
detection of a planet in another
galactic system 2.5 million light years
away. Since this one, we've actually
found some in other galaxies even
further away, such as the pace at which
astronomy seems to be uh roaring ahead.
And with that, I'll leave you with this
fantastic picture of the Andromeda
galaxy showing all of those features.
The nucleus in the center. Imagine the
narrow band image showing that that is
itself a spiral. the ring structures
around the galaxy that aren't spiral
arms,
all those dust lanes, all those star
forming regions and the M32 galaxy, the
dwarf that has punched through the
center there and lost its outer layers.
It's an incredible story and so far
advanced compared to when I first heard
about the Andromeda galaxy some 50 years
ago. Well, thanks very much for
listening. I hope you've enjoyed that
one.